Production and quality of fish fingers from different fish species
Production of fish fingers was achieved by using fish species such as sardine (Sardina pilchardus, Walbaum, 1792), whiting (Merlangius merlangus, Linnaeus, 1758) and pike perch (Sander lucioperca, Linnaeus, 1758). Quality changes of battered fish patties during a period of 8 months at -18 °C were investigated. According to the results of microbiological and chemical analysis, fish fingers were found to be within “acceptable limits” during frozen storage for 8 months. However, sensory analysis showed that, at the end of the frozen storage, fish fingers made from sardine could not be consumed because of rancidity.
In recent years, the increase of civilization or socioeconomic factors like the increasing numbers of working women of the population have led to direct consumer’s preference to ready-to-eat foods. These foods (cakes, crackers, burgers, fish fingers, marinated products, etc.) made from fish or other seafood are the products which are mostly preferred by consumers around the world and various studies on production and quality stability of these ready-to-eat foods have been done [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. It was reported that whiting (Merlangius merlangus) has been used for fish finger production as a raw material in the German fish industry for 80 years [8]. Frozen and breaded fish portions, “fish fingers”, are important fish products in Germany and two kinds of frozen fish fillets which are single-frozen and double-frozen fillets are used as raw materials in this product. Quality differences between fish portions made from single-frozen and double-frozen fish fillets (Gadus morhua and Theragra chalcogramma) were studied by Schubring [9]. Quality differences were investigated by sensory, chemical and physical analysis methods. At the end of the study, significant differences were found between the sensory properties (odor, flavor, texture and overall acceptability) of the products made from single- frozen and double-frozen fish fillets. Schubring [10] also studied the texture and sensory evaluation of fish fingers made from 13 different fish species. In Turkey, studies on ready-to-eat seafoods are just developing since seafoods are mostly consumed fresh. No previous study on fish finger production has been done in Turkey.

The aim of this study was to produce fish fingers from sardine, because of its abundance in Turkey, from whiting and pike perch, because of their suitability of producing fish fingers, and to investigate quality changes of the fish fingers during a period of 8 months’ storage at -18 °C.

Fillets of sardine, whiting and pike perch which had been frozen at -40 °C and stored at -18 °C for 5 months before this study were used as raw materials. Whiting and sardine were caught in May 2002 from the Aegean region of Turkey (Izmir). Pike perch was caught in the same year from Eðridir lake in Turkey. Salt, sugar, carbonate, red pepper, black pepper, curry, cumin, thyme, garlic powder, onion powder, breadstick crumbs and soybean oil were used as ingredients. (Adhesive Batter + predust, 18405506) and (Yellow Crumb, 18614115) patented products were used as pasting and coating materials, respectively. The fish fingers produced contained 20% of additive substances and 80% of minced fish. Additive substances consisted of breadstick crumbs, sugar, soybean oil (16%) and other spices (4%).

Figure 1 shows the flow sheet of the fish finger production. A fish finger production line (Koppens, Netherlands) of a private food and catering joint-stock company in Izmir (Turkey) was used. Frozen fish fillets were thawed overnight at 4 °C before starting the fish finger production.

Moisture [11], crude fat [12], crude protein [13], ash [13], carbohydrate [14] and cholesterol [15] analyses were performed to determine the chemical compositions of the fish and the fish fingers.

In order to investigate the chemical quality changes of the fish fingers during frozen storage, dimethylamine nitrogen (DMA-N), trimethylamine nitrogen (TMA-N) and trimethylamine-N-oxide nitrogen (TMAO-N) values were determined by a gas chromatographical method [16]. A total aerobic plate count (APC), coliform bacteria (CB), fecal CB (FCB) and E. coli counts, a coagulase-positive Staphylococcus aureus count, a yeast-mold count and Salmonella determination were made as the microbiological analysis of fish and fish fingers [17, 18].

A scoring test was used for the determination of the sensory quality of the fish fingers. Fish fingers were fried in a Teflon pan for about 5 min and then they were served to the panelists to evaluate the sensory attributes (appearance, texture, odor, flavor) of the samples by using a five-point descriptive scale [19]. The overall quality evaluation is 20 excellent, 18.2–19.9 very good, 15.2–18.1 good, 11.2–15.1 medium, 7.2–11.1 acceptability limit of consumption, 4.0–7.1 below consumption limits, 0 must be destroyed.

Chemical composition
The chemical compositions of the fish and the fish fingers are presented in Table 1. The moisture ratio of all fish finger groups decreased in comparison with that of the raw materials. The protein ratios did not change significantly while the raw materials were turning into the fish finger forms. The carbohydrate ratio of all fish finger groups increased because of the presence of breadstick crumbs, pasting and coating materials in the fish finger formulation. The cholesterol level of the fish fingers decreased to a certain level compared with that of the raw materials. It was reported that the cholesterol level of whiting (294.92 mg/100 g) decreased to 231.05 mg/100 g after frying [20]. The moisture ratio and the fat ratio in a frozen squid stick were found as 43.74 and 17.64%, respectively, by Llorka et al. [21]. The same authors also stated that the fat ratio increased while the moisture was decreased by processing the squid to a stick. It was also determined for Alaska whiting (Theragra chalcogramma) by the same authors that fat, ash, crude protein and moisture were 0.9–1.1, 1.44, 18.32 and 81.11%, respectively. These results are parallel with the values of the fish species and the fish fingers used for this study.

Chemical quality changes
Sardine fish fingers
The DMA-N and TMA-N values of sardine fish fingers stayed at low and almost constant levels during the 8 months’ storage period. The TMAO-N value decreased from 3.17 to 2.51 mg/100 g at the end of the storage period. It was reported that ammonia extracted from sardine and cod muscles increased rapidly together with the spoilage, whereas the DMA-N value stayed at a constant level [22].

Whiting fish fingers
The DMA-N value of whiting fish fingers was 1.25 mg/100 g at the beginning of the storage and reached 5.50 mg/100 g at the end of the eighth month. The TMAO-N value of whiting fish fingers was determined as 41.60 mg/100 g and this level decreased during the storage period. Karl et al. [23] reported the TMA-N, TMAO, DMA-N values of thawed fillets of Alaska whiting as 0.5–0.7, 79–99 and 4–6 mg N/100 g, respectively. These values were higher than the values of fresh whiting.

Pike perch fish fingers
The DMA-N value of pike perch fish fingers was determined as 1.18 mg/100 g at the beginning of the storage and increased to a level of 3.69 mg/100 g at the end of the eighth month. The TMAO-N value of pike perch fish fingers might tend to decrease during the storage period. This value was found as 6.51 mg/100 g at the end of the storage. Volatile amines like ammonia, TMA-N and TVB-N are used as indicators of freshness and spoilage. The concentrations of these amines increase at the same time. As a matter of fact, TMAO-N would be an excellent spoilage indicator for cod and also the TMAO-N behavior was different from that of DMA-N and decreased during the storage period [24].

Microbiological quality changes
LogAPCs of sardine, whiting and pike perch fillets were around 4–6/g (Table 3). These levels did not exceed the maximum limits (7 logAPC/g) of microbiological criteria for fresh and frozen fish given by the International Commission on Microbiological Specifications for Foods [25]. However, it was observed that sardine was of poor quality compared with other fish because of a high APC, a high CB count and the presence of E. coli. The microbial load decreased just after the fish finger production. LogAPCs of the fish fingers stayed around 3–5/g during the frozen storage period. The maximum logAPC for breaded and precooked fish products (fish sticks, fish cakes) was given as 7/g [25]. In this study the APCs of the fish fingers were lower than the maximum limits during the storage period at -18 °C for 8 months. No FCB and E. coli were detected in the fish fingers from whiting and pike perch in addition to CB in the fish fingers from pike perch during the storage. FCB were detected in the fourth and sixth months in the fish fingers from sardine but these levels were lower than the maximum limits [25]. No Salmonella, S. aureus and yeast-mold were detected in either fish fillets or fish fingers during the storage period.

Sensory quality changes
Sensory quality changes and overall acceptability of fish and fish fingers are given in Table 4 and in Figs. 2, 3, 4 and 5, respectively. According to the sensory qualities during the storage period of 8 months, the appearance, texture, odor and flavor of the fish fingers started having the lowest values in the third month. According to the results of overall sensory evaluation of fish, sardine was of “medium” quality, while the others were of “good” quality. When the sensory properties of the fish fingers were evaluated, panelists perceived a fishy taste in sardine fish fingers but that characteristic taste could not be perceived in fish fingers from whiting and pike perch. That is why sardine fish fingers generally received the lowest points from the panelists during the storage period. The overall acceptable value of sardine fish fingers decreased to 8.60, which was the lowest value among the all fish finger groups. The most important thing for the rejection of the sardine fish fingers at the end of the eighth month of the storage period at -18 °C was the formation of rancidity. It may be suggested that fresh material replacing the frozen material could be suitable for the production of sardine fish fingers to delay oxidation. Problems caused by fat oxidation occurred slowly in whiting and pike perch when compared with sardine since they have white flesh. As a result, it was found that fish fingers from whiting and pike perch could be consumed at the end of the eighth month at -18 °C.


