A Genetic Approach to Data Dimensionality Reduction Using a Special Initial Population

Abstract
Accurate classification of data sets is an important phenomenon for many applications. While multi-dimensionality to a certain point contributes to the classification performance, after a point, incorporating more attributes degrades the quality of the classification. In a pattern classification problem, by determining and excluding the least effective attribute(s) the performance of the classification is likely to improve. The task of the elimination of the least effective attributes in pattern classification is called ”data dimensionality reduction (DDR)”. DDR using Genetic Algorithms (DDR-GA) aims at discarding the less useful dimensions and re-organizing the data set by means of genetic operators. We show that a wise selection of the initial population improves the performance of the DDR-GA considerably and introduce a method to implement this approach. Our approach focuses on using information obtained a priori for the selection of initial chromosomes. Our work then compares the performance of the GA initiated by a randomly selected initial population to the performance of the ones initiated by a wisely selected one. Furthermore, the results indicate that our approach provides more accurate results compared to the purely random one in a reasonable amount of time.

Keywords
data dimensionality reduction feature extraction genetic algorithms attribute ranking attribute quality 


About this series
The series Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), including its subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence (LNAI) and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics (LNBI), has established itself as a medium for the publication of new developments in computer science and information technology research and teaching - quickly, informally, and at a high level.

The cornerstone of LNCS's editorial policy is its unwavering commitment to report the latest results from all areas of computer science and information technology research, development, and education. LNCS has always enjoyed close cooperation with the computer science R & D community, with numerous renowned academics, and with prestigious institutes and learned societies. Our mission is to serve this community by providing a most valuable publication service.

LNCS commenced publication in 1973 and quite rapidly attracted attention, not least because of its thus far unprecedented publication turnaround times. The 19

80s and 1990s witnessed a substantial growth in the series, particularly in terms of volumes published. In the late 1990s we developed a systematic approach to providing LNCS in a full-text electronic version, in parallel to the printed books. Another new feature introduced in the late 1990s was the conceptualization of a couple of color-cover sublines. Still, original research results reported in proceedings and postproceedings remain the core of LNCS.




